Dear Aztec C user:

    Here are some changes made to the package since the release doc was
printed. They are divided into two sections 3.40a and 3.40b.

Version 3.40a:

    C driver: the -n option for the linker should be -N.  This is a doc
error.

    Linker: the CLIB environment variable may now be a list of path
prefixes, separated by semicolons or spaces. 
    When using the -l option and the CLIB environment variable, the linker
will NOT search the current directory unless explicitly specified by an empty
prefix.
    For example:
        CLIB=/path1/;/path2/;   will search path1 first, then path2,
            then the current directory.  
        CLIB=;/path1/;;/path2/   will cause a search of the current
            directory, then path1, then the current directory
            again, then path2.

    New linker search algorithm.  The linker will now search for your object
file in 3 different ways. 1) it will take the name you give and search the 
current directory. if not found then 2) it will append .o (if no extension was
given) and search again. If still not found, then 3) it will take the name,
append .o if none given, and search the path given in the CLIB variable. If
still not found then an error message is given and the linker will quit.

     Stksiz.c: stksiz.c has been changed to add a variable that is used by
the stack overflow checking logic. If you are using stksiz.c, you will need to
use the version supplied in this release and make any changes required for your
own use.

Differences between v3.40A and v3.40B:

	v3.40B contains some fixes to the libraries, utilities, and the linker. 
These changes do NOT affect the documentation in any way. 

NOTE: The sign-on messages which contain the version of the compiler, 
assembler, linker, and utilities, are changed ONLY when the software changes.
(For example, in version 3.40B the linker will sign on as 3.40B while the
compiler and assembler will sign on as 3.40A.)

They changes are as follows:
	1) gchar is no longer multiply defined when scanf and fscanf are 
used together.
	2) cswit is no longer undefined when linking with third-party libraries.
	3) malloc now works properly in large data programs.
	4) obj -s and -u command now works correctly.
	5) obj now ignores sdb info (no need to use -n upon compilation)
	6) ord now works with large code files.
	7) hex86 options -j and -e can now be used together.

    We hope you enjoy using the MANX Aztec C system. Please read the release
doc as it contains a lot of useful information. Any problems with our software
can be reported via our tech line from 9am-6pm EST or by mail. The phone number
and address as well as some info to have handy can be found towards the end of
the release doc.
